III. THE JEWEL OF THE DOCTRINE

Now, from the Jewel of the Buddha, there arises the Jewel of the Doctrine. Therefore, immediately after [the explanation 
of] the former, we have one śloka concerning the latter.

(Kārikā 2). I bow before the sun of the Doctrine, Which is neither non-being nor being, Nor both being and non-being toge
ther, And neither different from being nor from non-being; Which cannot be speculated upon and is beyond explanation, Bu
t revealed [only] by introspection 2> and is quiescent; And which, with rays of light of the immaculate Wisdom, Destroys
passion, hatred and darkness with respect to all the basis of cognition. || 9 ||

(§1. Eightfold Quality of the Doctrine.) What is shown by this śloka? Because of its being unthinkable, non-dual, and bei
ng non-discriminative, And because of its pureness, manifestation and hostility; The Doctrine, which is Deliverance and 
also by which arises Deliverance Has the characteristics of the two Truths. || 10 ||

By this verse, in brief, the Jewel of the Doctrine is explained as being contracted by eight qualities. Which are the eig
ht qualities? They are 1) unthinkability, 2) non-duality, 3) non-discriminativeness, 4) purity, 5) [being] manifest, 6) 
hostility [against obstacles], 7) Deliverance [from passions], and 8) cause of Deliverance.

(§2. Nirodha-satya and Mārga-satya.) Deliverance is summarized In both truths, Extinction and Path, Which are each to be 
known By three qualities according to order. || 11 ||

Of these six qualities, by the first three qualities, i.e. unthinkability, non-duality and non-discriminativeness, the Tr
uth of Extinction is explained. From this [explanation] it should be known that the Deliverance [itself] is contracted. 
And by the remaining three qualities, i.e. purity, manifestation and hostility, the Truth of Path is explained, and from
this, it should be known that the cause of Deliverance is contracted.“That which is Deliverance” means [the Doctrine, a
s] the Truth of Extinction, and “by which arises the Deliverance” means ‘by [the Doctrine as] the Truth of Path.’ Having
joined these two together, it is explained, ‘being of the nature of Deliverance’ means ‘having characteristic of the tw
o purifying Truths’.

(§3. The Doctrine as the Truth of Extinction.) Because of its being beyond speculation and explanation, And because of it
s being the knowledge of Saints, Unthinkability [of the Doctrine should be known]; Because of quiescence it is non-dual 
and non-discriminative, And three [qualities], purity etc., are akin to the sun. || 12 ||

1) acintyatva: Unthinkability of the Truth of Extinction, in short, should be known by three causes. By which three? Beca
use, 1) it is not a sphere of speculation even by four categories [of existence], i.e. non-being, being, being and non-b
eing together, and neither being nor non-being; 2) it cannot be explained by any sound, voice, speech, way of speech, ex
planation, agreed term, designation, conversation [and so forth]; and 3) it is to be revealed by the introspection of Sa
ints.

2) advayatā & 3) nirvikalpatā. How should here be understood non-duality and non-discriminativeness of the Truth of Extin
ction? It is taught by the Lord as follows: “O Śāriputra, quiescent is this Absolute Body [of the Buddha], having the na
ture of being non-dual and non-discriminative”.Here, ‘dual’ means ‘action’ or ‘active force’, [as by deed, word and thou
ght] and ‘Defilement’; ‘discrimination’ means ‘Irrational Thought’ which is the cause of origination of Action and Defil
ements. By knowing deeply that this Irrational thought is extinct by nature, consequently, there is no origination of du
ality and discrimination; for this reason there is absolutely no origination of Suffering. This is called the Truth of E
xtinction of Suffering. It should never be explained that, because of extinction of something, it is [called] the Truth 
of Extinction of Suffering. It is said as follows:“O Mañjuśrī, in case there is neither origination nor extinction, ment
al actions as mind, intellect and consciousness never take place. Wherever no mental action takes place, there is no fal
se imagination by which they would think irrationally.One who applies himself with rational thought never makes Ignoranc
e arise. Non-arising of Ignorance means non-arising of the Twelve Parts of Existence. It is called ‘non-birth’, and so f
orth”.Also said [in the scripture]. “O Lord, extinction of Suffering does not mean the disappearance of element. By the 
term, ‘Extinction of Suffering’, O Lord, there is designated the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata which is beginningless, 
immutable, of no birth, non-originated, of no destruction, free from destruction, eternal, constant, quiescent, everlast
ing, purified by nature, released from covering of all moral defilements, and endowed with inseparable and unthinkable q
ualities of the Buddha, which are far more than the sands of the Ganga in number. And this very Absolute Body of the Tat
hāgata, O Lord, [when it is] unreleased from the covering of moral defilements, is called the Matrix of Tathāgata.”Thus 
all the determination of the Truth of Extinction of Suffering should be understood wholly and in detail according to Sūt
ras.

(§4. The Doctrine as the Truth of Path.) 4) śuddhi, 5) abhivyaktikaraṇa & 6) pratipakṣatā: Now indeed, the way to attain 
the Absolute Body of Tathāgata named Extinction of Suffering is the Path of perception and practice based upon the non d
iscriminative Wisdom. And this [Path] is to be known as similar to the sun with threefold common characteristics.[Namely
] 1) through the common characteristic of purity of the disk, because of being apart from all the minor defilements and 
stains; 2) through the common characteristic of being the manifestor of forms, because of making manifest knowable thing
s of all kinds; and 3) through the common characteristic of hostility against darkness, because of being the enemy of al
l kinds of obstacles against the true perception.

And ‘bondage’ means the origination of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance preceded by the thought which takes its basis [of cog
nition] upon the characteristic of unreal things. It is due to the union of the state of tendency with manifested state 
[of defilement].Indeed, people regard the unreal, i.e., ‘not of its nature’ thing as the [real] characteristic because o
f its desirable looks when Desire comes forth from its state of tendency; when Hatred comes forth [from its state of ten
dency], [they regard the unreal thing as the real characteristic] because of its detestable looks; and when Ignorance co
mes forth, then it is the same because of its obscure looks.And of those people who incorrectly take hold of characteris
tics of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance as the basis of cognition, the Irrational Thought occupies their mind. For those pe
ople whose mind is occupied with the Irrational Thought, there takes place the Defilement of any one of Desire, Hatred a
nd Ignorance.Due to this [origination of Defilement], they make the actions born of Desire by means of body, speech and 
thought, and also [in the same way] they produce the action born of Hatred, the action born of Ignorance. Furthermore, f
rom Action there results Rebirth.Thus these people, having tendencies [of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance], regarding the [
unreal] characteristic [as real], and making it the basis of cognition, [affectionally] hanging on it, produce the Irrat
ional Thought, from which consequently arises Defilement. Because of origination of Defilement, there arises Action; fro
m the origination of Action, there arises Rebirth. And all kinds of impurity of these Defilements, Action, Rebirth, etc.
come forth because people do not know, nor perceive the one [real] Essence as it is.

[On the other hand] these impurities should be seen in the same manner as by a perfect investigator who does not perceive
any [unreal] characteristic nor any basis of these impurities. [Because], when he perceives neither characteristic nor 
basis, then can he perceive the Reality. Thus, these elements are perfectly realized by the Tathāgata as equal through e
quality.And thus, this realization of all natures by Wisdom, as being equal without any addition nor diminution because 
of these two facts, i.e. because we cannot see any characteristic nor basis of non-being, and we can see the real charac
ter of being as the absolute truth, this is to be known as the ‘enemy’ of all kinds of obstacles against the true percep
tion.And because of the origination of this enemy, there is absolutely no aśociation nor harmony of the obstacles. This 
is indeed the Path of perception and practice based upon the non-discriminative Wisdom, which is the cause of attaining 
the Absolute Body [of the Tathāgata] and which is to be understood in detail according to the Sūtra named Prajnāpāramitā
.

